I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball.
It's Wednesday afternoon and you
probably heard that Sean Puff Daddy
Diddy Love Combmes. He's he's always
going to be Puffy to me. He was found
not guilty um on the most serious
charges in the racketeering
and sex trafficking case that the
government put on against him. He's only
been found guilty on two counts of the
least serious charge, transportation for
prostitution. And throughout the trial,
I I I really struggled with whether to
pay attention to this case. But I also
knew that like a lot of people, I had to
for a number of reasons. Um, for one
thing, this is a yet another very famous
black man on trial. And
I mean, he's a cultural icon. And for
some people, you know, he's a hero. But
it also involves some classic
intersections of the American criminal
justice system, grindhouse, race, sex,
and the government.
The government is trying this rich and
famous black man on behalf of two women
witnesses, one of whom filed a lawsuit
against him. And for a while, I was
content to follow from the sidelines
like everybody else. for a month. I was
really good reading all the great
reporting that my colleagues at the New
York Times were doing. Ben Cesario and
Julia Jacobs and Joe Kascarelli. I mean,
they were really doing it. Getting up at
the crack of dawn every day to go down
to that courthouse. And then there were
these wonderful courtroom sketches from
Elizabeth Williams and she did them
every day. And they were your only
window really into what was going on in
the courtroom visually because there
were no cameras. And for a while that
was enough for me. But then as the weeks
went on and I started keeping
spreadsheets to keep track of what was
happening and taking notes without
actually going,
I realized that I was kind of going
through something myself. This is a
really strange moment to be black in
this country right now.
And I wanted to see where this trial of
this very famous black man sat in that.
I just felt like I had to go. I mean,
for one thing, I live in New York City.
This courthouse is extremely easy to get
to. And so, I started getting up at 5:00
a few mornings in the last month of the
trial to just go stand in line at 500
Pearl Street to get a seat in the
courthouse along with a bunch of other
people. I mean, regular people, people
from like the Bronx and Brooklyn. And in
all, it was a really moving, strange,
very 2025 experience that also felt
anciently American at the same time. And
one of my producers, John White, who
I've been talking to about this case for
weeks, asked me to just get my mic out
and talk it through. So, I'm sitting
here at my dining table and John is John
looks like he's at work. Hi, John. Hey,
Wesley. Where do you Where do you want
me to start?
Let's just jump right in. You were one
of the few people at the trial. Uh, you
got to see it up close. Can you paint a
picture of just a little scene setting
of what the courtroom looked like and
what you were seeing? Um, 500 Pearl
Street. You know, it looks like a lot of
your brutalist
government structures,
um, you stand outside on Pearl Street,
you you wait line. I got there, the days
I went, I got there sometime between
5:30 and 5:45 a.m. And you're just
always aware that there are
there are people coming to just like see
what I was seeing with their own two
eyes. Some of those people were real big
puffy people. Like they were there to
support him. They think that this case
is some BS and the government is out to
get him. And um they were a lot of in a
lot of cases, you know, they didn't have
press badges, but they were tick-
tocking, you live streaming
courtroom watchers. His his family was
his mother was there almost every day.
Um,
several of his children were there a lot
of the time. Um, I went on the day the
defense closed its case. It made its
closing argument and three of his
daughters were there and they were like
immaculately dressed along with one of
his sons. But I really noticed the two
twins and the girls were just really I
mean they looked like they were going to
church um is how I would describe. I
mean that was it was it was Sunday best
attire. I actually the first day I went
I got dressed up
and then I stopped dressing up quite a
bit. Why did you dress up? Because it
felt important to me. Um, it felt
important. I mean, I'd been to court
many times, but there was something
about going to see this because really,
John, I was going to make my mind up
about
not whether or not this man did anything
criminal,
but
what to do with the idea that I was at
yet another trial for
for a famous black person. Yeah. Um, so
I as you're setting the scene, I'm just
curious, what did Shawn Combmes look
like during this these proceedings?
Okay, I'm going to tell you that part of
the reason I was inclined to go
and see it with my own two eyes was that
in Elizabeth Williams courtroom
sketches.
Shawn Combmes looked
not like the Shawn Combmes that that I
grew up with and you grew up with John.
You know, describe that a little bit. He
was gray. His hair was basically white.
Um, and his goatee was white. And I was
like, "This can't be right." I mean, as
for as much as I believed the truth of
them, I just found his appearance
in these in these courtroom sketches. I
just couldn't believe it because this is
I mean, he was his hair was jet black a
year ago. Um, I don't think it was an
accident.
Um, I think,
look, I don't know how much he had been
coloring his hair before this happened,
but I think whether or not the defense's
strategy was to get him to look a
certain way for the jury,
um, because the jury
is 12 people. I don't know what the
average age was, but I think the
youngest juror was 30 and the oldest
juror was um
maybe 70s, 80s. Um there are a few
jurors, there are several jurors in
their 60s. I mean, I think they wanted
to make Shawn look
the age of the people who were trying
him to make him seem even more like one
of their peers. He wore sweaters
and slacks.
I mean, this is this is the this is the
man behind Shawn John. You know what
Shawn John wasn't making? Slacks.
I mean, he wasn't doing sweaters and not
like this. I mean, he looked like he
looked like a deacon. He looked like a
deacon on Saturday evening preparing for
Sunday service.
And
this goatee and this white hair. I mean,
I don't know how admissible this is. The
trial is over, so I guess we can just
speak freely here. But
all I could think about was Uncle Ben.
All I could think about was the history
of
desexualized black men. And I just to
before I finish this thought, I'm going
to interrupt myself just to say this is
a sex trial.
The case has to be made over and over
and over and over again for two months
about all the sex that was being had,
all the drugs that were done to
facilitate the sex. sex that went on for
hours, in some cases according to this
testimony, days. The class of sex we are
talking about, he gave a name. They
called it a freak off. And you know, in
the popular imagination,
I think anybody who is familiar with Bad
Boy Records,
the people around Bad Boy hip hop
itself, I don't think that and you know
the the sort of um
the mythos of Shawn Combmes. I don't
think anybody was necessarily surprised
by any of those things. is I mean
you and I have heard stories. We have
been reading about his white parties um
some of his extracurricular non-artic
shenanigans and and events for years.
And so
in the courtroom seeing this deacon on
Saturday afternoon preparing for Sunday
service,
it was like, wait, what? this guy. And
the the thing that I'm thinking about as
as I'm thinking about whether or not
this was part of the defensive strategy
here is like was his hair being colored
or was he strenuously advised to not
keep coloring his hair cuz the goatee
matched the his you know his haircut.
But it also is the fact that throughout
the history of black men in America,
the least threatening style of black man
is is the Uncle Ben is Rastice, the guy
on the Cream of Wheat Box. Um, it's Bill
Bojangles Robinson dancing with little
Shirley Temple. like these
non-threatening
and you know a lot of times in Hollywood
history
people who are in their 30s and their
20s and their early 40s are being made
up to look like old black men because
that's preferred. Um so there just is
something very
wink wink about his appearance in the
courtroom.
It was like he was kind of playing a
role. I mean, he seemed like himself in
terms of his
his charisma was still a little bit on
display, but there was something about
the gray that really seemed meant to me
to communicate to the jurors that
somebody else did this.
Um, sec. Does this guy look like a sex
trafficker? Okay. I mean, maybe he sent
all these texts, maybe he was having all
this sex, but racketeering uncle Uncle
Shawn over here, I don't think so. I
don't think so. And I just think, you
know, the part of the 400 years of
American history or at least 200 and
something years of commercialized
depictions of black people,
whoever that guy was in the courtroom
for those two months,
he corresponded very tidily with that
image of of a of a desexualized
um harmless
docile,
subservient uh black man. So,
you're watching Uncle Ben on trial
and
but you're having mixed feelings about
what I don't know how are you feeling
about what that means and how this jury
might be interpreting this this vision.
I first of all want to just say like
I think the jury kind of did
what it had to do. Um, you know, the
government had a tough had a tough case
to make, right? because
they wanted to really tie
the documented behavior courtesy of, you
know, a lot of video, that infamous
hotel um surveillance video or security
footage of him beating Cassandra Ventura
in the hallway in Los Angeles at I
believe the Intercontinental Hotel. And
the defense repeatedly said like, "Yeah,
this guy was terrible. he sucked. You
know, he's he's got some freaky deicky
stuff going on. Uh but all of that can
can be true and yet none of it is
racketeering. Um so the jury, I think
they just they
it was really, you know, to the letter
of the law, I don't know. It it felt to
me like I was there for the defense's
closing argument. And let me tell you,
you would have thought that people had
paid to go see a Dave Chappelle special
because this guy was like um Mark an um
Agnif is the was the lawyer who did the
closing um defense argument
and he was just dismissing the
government's case left and right and you
know he went right up to the line of
this is the government trying to try a
black man who's very successful,
you know, and what do they want? They
wanted some lube and they found it. So,
we're all here because of because of
some some sex paraphernalia. Okay,
that's their case. He's got to go to
prison because he cuz he because he
likes to have a good time. Well, you
know who else like to have a good time?
These women. These women are also up for
a good time, too. So, I don't know what
we're doing here. That was the defense's
argument. Um, and people loved it. Like
afterwards, you know, we'd go to the
cafeteria when he when we were finally
we took a break. I think it was a lunch
break and he hadn't finished yet, but
everybody I mean when he finished John
and I had heard that this this almost
never happened.
It didn't happen in the courtroom, but
people were clapping in the overflow.
There was applause. And there's a woman
behind me, a black woman who um she was
a she's some kind of legal journalist.
She's like, "Not us clapping for for the
def for the defense closing argument."
No, she got up and left. But it was
clear. You just could hear people saying
like, "Man, that was way better than
what the prosecution had to offer."
Because I don't know. I mean, I don't
know if the jury found him entertaining,
but he was very clear about what the
stakes were and what they weren't. Um,
so I I understand how the jury reached
this verdict. Um, given
the the the the difficulty of what the
government had to do. It did not it
didn't really surprise me once I sat
with it, but I was really convinced by
by the prosecution's rebuttal to the
defense's closing argument, but I don't
the jury didn't buy it. Tell me more
about what you were thinking cuz you
didn't necessarily have you thought that
maybe this was going to go the other
way. I don't think they believed Jane
for one thing. Um,
I think that Jane was really problematic
for I think both both Cassandra Ventura
and Jane
um were problematic
because it seemed like the defense could
always just find text messages where
they were just like, "Yep, sounds great
to me. I can't wait to freak off. I'm
here to freak."
when, you know, I was reading between
the lines on every piece of of their
testimony, right? Like every time some
text messages were introduced, I was
like, "Yeah, but have you ever been in
abusive relationships before?" I mean,
this is an abusive relationship. You
keep thinking that if you do what he's
asking you to do, then you're going to
get what you want because you gave him
what he wanted. So, I'm sitting here
listening to Jane. Um I would say day 20
of the trial. Um I don't remember which
which day of Jane's six days on the
witness stand um this was. Um but there
were a lot of moments where the defense
wanted to paint Jane as a gold digger.
Right. There's there there's this
amazing moment where
um
one of his defense attorneys
was asking her about Jane having seen
Shawn Combmes with
another woman in an Instagram post and
she had a Bay of Vanetta bag that I
guess Jane had coveted
and the defense attorney in
cross-examining Jane was like, "So,
you you saw this woman had this Bayga
bag and you felt some type of way about
that, didn't you?" And she was like, "I
did." And the defense attorney was like,
I mean, all the texts are there. She's
basically got all the information she
needs, but she wants to dramatize and
make it clear and try to catch Jane,
I don't know, contradicting herself or
just like shaming her into realizing
that what you were really after here is
this man's money and the things he gave
you. And that's what you liked about
this relationship.
um you were having all this sex because
he was paying your rent, which in this
case he was paying her $10,000 a month
rent on this apartment. Um but the bag,
so at some point the defense attorney
says, "How much does this BGA Vanetta
bag cost?" And Jane, who is kind of had
it at this point, I mean, I think this
was her last day of testimony. And
Jane's like, "Well, you look like you
would know."
And there was a, you know, there was
some laughter. There was, and there was
a lot of like, "Oh my god, no, she
didn't." And the defense attorney
repeats the question, "I'm asking you,
Jane, how much does a bag like this go
for?" And she says, "What how much does
my body cost?" I had to look at my
notebook. She says, "How much does my
body cost?"
Um, there was another moment about a
Chanel bag and the defense attorney is
like, "You didn't get the Chanel bag,
did you?" And Jane, without missing a
beat, says, "No, I got trauma."
And I just felt like
I was so much more inclined to believe
that whatever was going on in those text
messages
was
quote consensual unquote, right? It's
just there's so many salacious
like lurid
unsaavory details, but at the end of the
day, like I just believed that they
didn't want to be having a lot of the
sex they had. And the government was
like, "Yo, they only have to not have
wanted to do it one time, once. That is
sex trafficking." I mean there are
numerous examples of text messages in
which the women are saying I don't like
this. I don't I mean I I don't I'm not
enjoying this. There are a lot of texts
in which there are a lot of texts in
which they say they they are happy to do
it and they can't wait to do it. And you
know Jane of course is helping set up
some of these these freakoffs or in
Jane's case they were called hotel
nights. So I mean everything is muddled
and so if if one thing is muddled then
everything is muddled at some point
right because you have your doubts and
the thing that I was having my doubts
about and this is not something I feel
great about but listen welcome to
America. Um you put a black man on trial
and have four white women or or you know
a table full of white women trying to
put him away. you kind of have to watch
how you put things and or you don't have
to but certain people are going to hear
certain things and
I was very receptive to their case but I
was also kind of like you are all but
playing on a particular kind and the
defense was prepared for this. you were
all but kind of playing on a black male
predatory stereotype
that
I mean it fits it fits the scenario
here. But John, I got to tell you, like
being there and hearing the way that the
prosecution was putting some of his
behavior,
I'm not going to lie, I looked at that
table.
I looked at him sitting at that table
and I was like, "Not Puffy, not Uncle
Puffy over here." And I just think that
there are all of these hory old American
tropes
that when you're talking about a black
man being on trial for anything related
to sex, um,
they're going to dredge up some stuff.
And I definitely felt like on a number
of occasions that these prosecutors are
going a little bit they are going up to
the line and the defense I think in
having him look the way he did or making
sure like maybe stopping him from
looking a different way in the courtroom
um like the Puffy we all know and love
or maybe have know and have complicated
feelings about. uh that guy wasn't
there, but this this historical figure
was. You came into this conversation, I
think, with mixed feelings about um
Shawn Combmes and and his guilt and and
I'm curious now that the verdict has
been decreed or or read um are you still
feeling that way or do you feel like
he's guilty of something? And what
exactly is that? I don't guilty of
something that
cuz you were feeling that way before,
man. I just want to say well it sounded
a lot like that to me. Or what's on
trial here? Well, that's the better
question, right? Like that's the real
question. What is on trial here? And
the,
you know, whenever whenever it's us
in a government trial,
it always feels like we're black
Americans, African-Americans, whenever
we're on trial. Whenever it's one of us,
um,
we kind of have to reconcile, especially
when that person is someone who has
given us through their art so much
happiness, joy,
um, has felt like a like a weather vein
for
either the black condition writ large or
hope um, for black people. um or you
know is just ingenious like really
created
for himself or herself but often it's
pretty much we're talking about men here
um
a lane that didn't previously exist
either because this country wouldn't
allow them into it or because nobody
else had had thought to do what some of
these people had
um you know, Puffy was a steward of the
black image um in of a you know, a
particular particular black image,
right? Can you describe that a little
bit more? Like what was this image and
what like I'm I'm thinking like he's
kind of a source of pride and and black
excellence or just excellence in
general. He was a he was a mogul, music
mogul and close to being a billionaire
which yeah celebrated. I mean that is a
mountaintop for African-Americans.
Um and I mean you know amassing wealth
and amassing a wealth that can be passed
from one generation to another
generation. But you know Sean Combmes
the you know the hits are the hits right
like the songs that he produced um that
he you know the productions he was
involved in
Biggie Mace Mary Jay Blige just we can
leave it at that um obviously there's
more I mean Puffy was a superstar
producer who also
went in and out of being a performer
himself. self. Um, and he
wasn't the greatest rapper, but you
know, his his reach was huge, right? The
hits were massive. And I think his his
talent scouting was I mean, maybe, you
know, he was a talent scout par
excalance. He knew who to get behind. um
he knew he knew who could do what um and
how to take that to the to the peaks of
you know American popular culture. I
mean he kind of came along at the right
time. Um his melding of pop and hiphop
through the samples, right? Like was
this song super popular? Yeah. I'm gonna
I'm gonna take,
you know, Diana Ross's I'm Coming Out
and throw it throw it right in the
middle of this record and have a
massive, you know, Biggie song on my
hands. It feels like you haven't been
wrestling with this idea of art versus
the artist stuff in this case like you
would say in the case of Michael Jackson
or wrestle, you know, with Prince um
you know, Picasso.
Not to say there he's compared to all
these people, but you know he is an
artist. So I'm just curious like why you
haven't been wrestling with this. It
sounds like you haven't been wrestling
with this idea.
No, my wrestling is more about
My wrestling is more about what to do
with trials like these.
whether the verdict is whether they're
acquitted or or convicted.
It's just there's something that is
always being asked of black people in
moments like this.
And it's to
situate this person who's on trial in a
very particular history.
And
for a long time, that history really was
about bogusness
and a and a system that
didn't
have any regard for black people or
black life that was designed to
disappear them. I think what I'm saying
here, John,
is and I don't know where you are on
this, but I feel like I have reached my
limit. And I think I think what I mean
with that is like on the one hand, I
don't want to know anything about this
man's sex life. I don't want to know
anything. But now
I think thanks to this trial I know
everything
and and more and more. Um am I mad at
the government
with respect to that for like throwing
his business out on the street?
No, I don't think so. Although that's
kind of complicated by this history that
I'm talking to you about. I feel
connected to this person Shawn Combmes
for any number of reasons. His his work
but also his personhood, right?
We have been as black people,
conditioned,
encouraged, conditioned
to
be very skeptical of when the government
comes knocking on our door for anything,
especially
I mean really anybody. But it hurts. It
it's supposed to hurt more when it's
somebody who has brought us so much
pleasure and joy and and fun and has
made it out of what is waiting for and
what many of us are still sitting in
with respect to the worst of American
life. Right. Cultural predecessors to
that too, right? You mean like OJ and
Michael Jackson and and R. Kelly, Bill
Cosby. Um, sure.
Um,
to lay out each one of those cases,
they're all different, but they all ask
of us the same thing,
which is how much of what these people
are being charged with having done do we
turn a blind eye to? How much of our
history as black people
requires us when Janice Combmes issues a
statement that essentially calls this
trial
a public lynching which is a real echo
of the way we have been conditioned
to think about these events. I mean,
this is how Clarence Thomas described
his hearing with Anita um Anita Hill's
accusations against him of sexual
harassment
in 1991.
He called it a high-tech lynching. So,
we we are familiar with how to talk
about being a black person on trial
because it never really feels like it's
just one person. It's all of us. But at
the same time, in a lot of these cases,
the person on trial is depending on us,
meaning his people, to understand that
this is some kind of high-tech lynching.
And I don't feel that way here. And
you're saying here you've drawn the line
despite the fact that he represents
black excellence
that Shawn Combmes rep represents black
excellence. You're saying no. I just
think that there's such a thing as black
excellence exploitation, right? Like are
we never guilty of anything?
Well, I the question is how did he
exploit it? Then if that's your if
that's your argument, then how did Shawn
Combmes exploit it? It never felt to me
like this was a case of a of a black
person's being black on trial. Um, the
defense never
only it it it walked right up to the
line of thinking about this as the
government trying to lock up a
successful black man. It really wasn't a
big factor in this trial. There was no
Johnny Cochran here um to to play a to
play the so-called race card. But there
doesn't need to be anymore because
we're now familiar with the mechanics of
of these events. Um,
obviously if if if someone like Shawn
Combmes is on trial, something fishy is
going on because
it just doesn't make any sense
otherwise. And you know, there were many
people doing Tik Toks and live streams
and like leaving the courtroom to like
update their followers to to basically
make that argument. I mean, there were
people like, I got there 5:30 in the
morning. And there were people already
going just like, "Yo, this is what's
happening today. This is what happened
yesterday." and they're just laying out
all the ways that the government is
failing to make this man guilty to a
jury of his peers. And they were right.
But I went and saw a couple years ago,
last year actually, it was a year ago,
Gerard Carmichael. I went and saw him do
some standup. He was trying some stuff
out. He was thinking through his
sexuality. He had come out as as gay
not, you know,
the year or two years before that in
this standup special for HBO.
And
just out of nowhere, he was thinking
about
the the revelation of some of these
freakoffs
and that there might have been video of
some of them. And then there were all
these rumors about, you know, who Puffy
was having sex with.
And Gerard Carmichael says at some
point, I think he just tossed it off.
You know,
this is a lot of work for people to be
put through just so this n-word can
not admit he's bisexual.
And
I think about that all the time. It came
up during the trial. There was a moment
when Jane was on the stand and it was a
really
I mean it was a really
profound moment to me.
And it was after a lunch break. She's on
the stand and she is thinking through
what it was that she was really being
asked to do by Puffy because his
sexuality officially wasn't on trial.
But we're just learning about its
complexity basically and its shame and
and trying to, you know, Jane to me was
somebody who was trying to push him past
his limits. And she loves this man and
she thinks that they there is a
possibility that they have this they're
going to have this great life together.
And at some point she says that she was
trying to understand the relationship
and she discovered
the word cuckold.
C U C K O L D or you know short the
short version is cuck and she felt that
definition was spoton. This is how she
testifies uh during cross-examination
because it clarified things for her.
This sorry it clarified things for her.
This is me reading from my notes
basically and she's trying to understand
what he couldn't say. She deduces that
cucking was a way to explore his
bisexuality. This is what she says. Um,
and I'm paraphrasing, which might be
otherwise which he might otherwise be
ashamed of. She surmises that, you know,
she's being used as a proxy for his
desire for the men that she's being
asked to have sex with.
And at some point the word voyerism um
and escapism are words that he like to
use for these hotel nights that they
would have. And she said she's quite
thoughtful in this moment. She's like,
"No, those words those words never felt
right to me." Voyerism and escapism.
Um
she liked cuck. Why am I telling you
this Gerard Carmichael story, Jod?
Why am I invoking
Jane's belief that she was a
instrument in the exploration of
bisexual fantasies?
It's kind of an excuse. And I don't mean
like it's a frivolous excuse. I mean it
is meaningful. This whole situation is
about
is set in motion by this fantasy, by
these desires, by the power to execute
these fantasies on this massive scale.
But the at the end of the day,
this
to me represents
the problem that I've been having with
these trials and what they are asking of
us and what they rob us of in the larger
scheme of things.
And it's
that they are robbing us of our
individual humanity because when trouble
strikes and the government comes
knocking on our door, we cease being
individual people
and we immediately
begin to see ourselves as a people.
And I think the thing that is so hard
about a case like this is that
I truly don't know whether or not the
government
needed to bring this case. I don't know.
I don't know. I've been like, you stand
outside that courthouse often enough and
you hear these bloggers and Tik Tockers
and live streamers and the just
gets in your head.
But what I do know is that
it is really important that we
we're talking about like do we separate
the artist from the art? It's not I hate
that question. It's dumb.
But for black people, I think a
correspondent question is,
do we separate the individual,
the person from the people?
And if we can do that, then we I think
can treat
someone like Shawn Colmes
like the human man he is who made
mistakes.
Like what do we owe this man as an
individual human being?
And the place that I get off is
using our history and our peoplehood to
paper over his humanity and all its
flaws. It isn't so much that I don't
want Shawn Combmes in my life. I think
that what I'm tired of is
being put through this.
And
am I mad at him or you know what is am I
mad at the government for putting him
through this?
I don't know because what this looks
like on the other hand is
two women who say something terrible
happened to them and nobody really
listens.
And that doesn't feel good either.
So
I think that's where my bus stops. I
think that's where my bus stops and I
get off. Yeah. No, you really helped to
eliminate some of the things I've been
thinking about. Thank you for helping me
through this conversation or like just
thinking through these feelings. I
appreciate that you uh you can host this
show anytime you want.
I don't think I want to do that, but
thanks Wesley.
[Music]